Employment Liaison Officers

The responsibility of ELOs is to carry AA’s message to employers within their local area supported by intergroup and region and a PI/Service Committee if one exists. Employment specifically concerns any organisation employing or serving staff companies, trade unions and associations, government departments and/or related agencies. An established period of sobriety (ideally not less than three years) and a thorough knowledge of the AA Service Handbook for Great Britain are necessary before accepting this role. Willingness to commit to three years service and the ability to deal with a wide range of professional people and talk about AA when invited to do so, are also qualities that have proven to be desirable.

Many industries see alcoholism as a very wasteful overhead and are often encouraged to find that AA does not cost them either time or money. They see the advantages of a sober worker who attends AA and will often display and make available AA literature. Experience has shown that a business-like approach to employers is most likely to succeed. Often a phone call to ascertain the right person to contact is required, asking for the name 46 47 Some companies that have formal programmes for problem drinkers may support the formation of an AA group. Experience suggests that an AA group is most successful when the non-alcoholics who have co-operated limit their “support” to making facilities available for group meetings. Meetings held on company premises, whether in company time or not, are within the Traditions of AA, provided that no strings are attached. AA groups within a company made up entirely of employees of that particular company can be helpful in introducing the AA programme to the problem drinker. Experience has indicated that the “specialised” group is not totally successful, unless the newcomer is also encouraged to participate in the activities of regular AA groups. Where a company employs a recovering alcoholic as a counsellor, an AA group can usually be set up without difficulty, following traditional AA procedures. In such cases, it is appropriate for the counsellor to take his or her place as a member of the group. Where there is no recovering alcoholic on the company’s staff, an outside AA group may be invited to assist with the responsibility of forming and sponsoring a group made up of company employees. In most areas the local AA groups should be able to handle all referrals, making “employee only” groups unnecessary. 5:1.7 Trade Unions Unions should be dealt with in similar ways to employers. However, our experience shows that before contacting local branch officers, an approach initially to their headquarters is not only courteous but also beneficial in carrying the AA message. Often they will supply you with details of who to see or may arrange it directly. Many Unions and employers organise conferences, trade shows and information meetings. Attendance at these meetings can usually be arranged through the organisers or the support of a friendly contact. The display of literature and providing information can involve a PI/ Service Committee with much follow-up work in carrying the message to those who attend. 5:1.8 To Summarise Guided by our Traditions the Employment Liaison Officer can, while acting as a contact for employers within an intergroup area, working as part of a PI/Service Committee and sharing information with other intergroup officers and in particular the regional Employment Liaison Officer, offer our programme of recovery to all problem drinkers who come to the notice of employers. AA welcomes any opportunity to:

Meet with any employer to discuss ways AA can co-operate
Present meetings to explain AA to employees
Take employees with a drinking problem to AA meetings and title of the person who deals with alcohol policies or employee welfare. This could be the Personnel Manager, Welfare Officer, Occupational Health Nurse, Health and Safety Officer, Company Doctor or Managing Director. An approach should then be made by telephone, e-mail or letter to that person, requesting an interview and followed up by a letter of confirmation if requested. Intergroups and regions should supply properly headed paper for this purpose.