Health Liaison Officers

The purpose of this guidance, in conjunction with the AA Health Resource Pack, is to assist Health Liaison Officers, HLOs, to carry the message to the still suffering alcoholic through co-operation with professional healthcare workers.

Intergroups and regions are responsible for the appointment of an HLO who ideally should work as a member of the local AA combined services or other appropriate committee. The HLO establishes contact and maintains communication with healthcare professionals, and reports back to intergroup and/or region.

National Health Areas may not coincide with region or intergroup areas and it is important to identify where these differences occur
the emphasis on hospital based treatment for patients with alcohol problems has shifted to community based initiatives
healthcare is no longer the sole province of the health service; depending on the area, healthcare may also include the local authority social services departments and private sector care providers
familiarity with the local area and a thorough knowledge of The AA Service and Structure Handbooks for Great Britain are vital to the role of HLO
Healthcare professionals

By this we mean doctors, nurses, GPs and others whose remit includes contact with the active alcoholic. It should also include hospital and treatment centre administrators/managers. We may also be required to talk to student health care professionals. Do not be surprised if professionals do not use the word alcoholic, and instead refer to “problem drinker”, “alcohol dependent” and “alcohol abuse” or “misuse”.

Making contact

It may be useful together with the Public Information Officer and/or combined services committee to map the healthcare professionals, hospitals, treatment centres and other healthcare providers within your area. From this information an action plan for making contact can be developed. It is important for a list of existing contacts and hospital groups to be included with your map, as their experience will be a valuable asset in developing new contacts. Teamwork is the key for this to work effectively. It is also helpful to have a list of AA members who can help give talks and send out information.

As with other external services, contact by letter or e-mail asking for an appointment is the firrst step with perhaps a follow up telephone call. Intergroups and regions should have headed paper for this purpose.